Factors to keep in mind while working on Medical Fundraisers

1. Ailment: ailments whose symptoms are more visible (given we get the appropriate photos) are more likely to work. The audience is able to sympathize with diseases like cancer, but not with thalassemia - since it has no visible symptoms and is a lesser known condition. Ailments that have shown a higher success rate are liver diseases and cancer. Accident/trauma cases have also proven to work well. 


2. Age: campaigns with children have worked better in the past as the audience is able to feel/see the pain/sadness/discomfort more. Without a strong angle, stories of older patients have seldom worked. Especially for those with kidney diseases. 

3. Photographs: photos are an important part of the narrative, and getting high quality photos of children crying/scared/undergoing treatment etc (ethically taken) has proven to work for the ads and the story. It’s also important (especially in cases of dramatic physical transformations due to the disease) to have older photos of the child/beneficiary with their family etc. 

4. Angle: this is the driving factor of the story. It could be strong back stories, profession of the parents, the ailment itself, the accident etc. While everyone has a story, more powerful stories tend to work better. 
[a]
5. Variety: It’s always best to have a variety of ailments while sourcing. This causes less fatigue among the audience and also gives us a chance to see what’s working at that particular point of time. 

6. Cases of suicide: we’ve often seen with cases like these (where the person has tried to commit suicide but has survived and is in a critical condition right now) that the audience is less sympathetic to the cause. They’re hesitant to donate. However, the decision to take up these campaigns can be made on a case to case basis - depending on the legality of it. 



Writing a story for the purpose of medical fundraising involves two major parts:


A. Breaking the ice i.e. talking to the parents/family members of the patient 


B. Penning down the inputs from the call in a manner that will make people donate 


A. Let’s talk about breaking the ice. 

The first step would be to introduce yourself on the call  - tell the beneficiary/family who you are and where you’re calling from. Tell them the purpose of the call. This is your chance to make them feel comfortable and set the tone for the rest of the conversation. 

1. How is your child/family member? 
2. How old is your child/family member? 
3. When did you find out about the disease? 
4. How did you find out? What were the initial symptoms? 
5. What disease/condition does your child/family member suffer from? 
6. What treatment is needed? When do they need to start? 
7. How long will the treatment go on for?
8. What were they like before this disease changed their life? 

9. What did they like doing? Did they go to school? 
10. What do they want to be when they grow up? 
11. Does the hospital scare them? How do they react? 

12. What work do you or/and your spouse do?
13. How much do you earn? 
14. How do you manage your daily expenses? 
15. How have you managed the medical expenses so far? 


This is an intrinsic part of writing the story because this is where we get to know/verify the facts - both medical and otherwise. It is important to break the ice with the family members of the patients during the time that we interact with them. We talk to them in their distressed condition, hoping to catch them at their vulnerable best. The more vulnerable they are, the more satisfied we are. We ask them very private questions like that of their financial condition, their monthly salary, if they are in debt, if they have sold their gold. We ask parents whose babies are fighting for their lives in NICU, if s/he is their firstborn. We ask survivors of domestic violence, if we can write about their condition in a click-batey manner. We ask cancer patients if they miss running around, if the chemo hurts, if the hair fall embarrasses them. We expect them to open up, emote. Sometimes, we don’t get ‘enough information/emotion’, ‘our stories aren’t good’. This is when it becomes difficult. 


B. This might seem like a roadblock, but this is where our creative genius comes to play. 


This takes us to the second part - the actual act of writing a story. The first step is to figure out an angle. An angle is nothing but the way we want our story to unfold. It is that one factor around which the story evolves, something that you feel will catch the eyes of the readers. Sometimes, for medically urgent stories, the angle stares at your face: 


The criticality of the patient’s condition - https://milaap.org/stories/help-baby-vishal 
In other times, we come across terribly sad stories: The struggle of a single parent - https://milaap.org/stories/support-vaibhav-asudani  


The fact that the patient was abandoned by his/her parents or is an orphan: https://milaap.org/stories/support-krishna-singh ,https://milaap.org/stories/help-shravan-kate 


 A teenager determined to survive despite his unimaginable breathing trouble : https://milaap.org/stories/sougata 


A young boy fighting cancer wanting to die because he can’t bear to see his parents in pain - https://milaap.org/stories/support-rayyan-majid
 
 A cancer survivor fighting to save her daughter : https://milaap.org/stories/help-rakshana


 A young mother fighting cancer : https://milaap.org/stories/keertibala-shukla 

But sometimes, our stories don’t have out of the world angles. That’s when we need to probe deeper - a passing comment can become an angle : https://milaap.org/stories/help-debnathmaity , https://milaap.org/stories/support-rayyan-majid 


Blood diseases, NICUs end up being especially challenging because of no visible symptoms for the former and the similar kind of information for the latter. Focusing on minute details and stray comments usually helps.  


The next step is figuring out a suitable title. It is important to remember that we need to write in a lucid and simple way that is easily consumable by readers who are mostly mobile users and who look at our stories and titles only in passing. It is important to have a good/unique/sometimes even, click-batey title that grabs the attention of the reader. It is also important to frame our titles in alignment with that of our ‘angle’. 


All of this is easier said than done. So here are some guidelines that can help us write a story that is not only easy to read and catches (and holds) the attention of the reader but also has higher chances of raising its goal amount: 


1. Avoid repetition in the story. The stories need not always be in the order of how it started - how he is now - what he needs - financial status.


2. A detailed medical description of the disease in the intro in itself is not required. It is confusing and takes away the interest. Our aim should be to keep the reader interested till the last line of the story. 


3. Even in a paragraph, let's refrain from getting into major technicalities, example - misalignment of the 1st and 2nd vertebra - simpler to say dislocated spine? Even with heart diseases, sometimes the details of the disease explains arteries, ventricles etc. If it's too complicated, then, we can mention the effects of the disease instead - example, causes less blood to flow to the rest of the body, breathlessness etc. 


4. We should take great care to ensure that the paragraphs are not too long. Readers tend to avoid verbose paragraphs and sometimes, even great quotes/info tends to get sidelined when they are hidden in big paragraphs. 


5. When we write the quotes in the story, we need to ensure that the emotion in them is not plastic. ‘Shattering of dreams’ and ‘shaking of the earth beneath my feet’ is not always that happens when a 9-year-old’s mother gets to know that her daughter has had a relapse! We need to be very realistic and if possible, think in the native language and transliterate that into English.


6. Subheadings are an essential part of the story. But they should not be repetitive across stories. Sometimes it can be difficult to think of innovative subheads for similar stories, but let's try not to repeat it. They need to be catchier, try not to reveal everything in the subhead.




It is however, important to understand that these are not foolproof rules that guarantee results. They are a mere conglomeration of observations which might come handy.These guidelines are an ever-evolving set which will have additions and subtractions according to the current demand in the market. 
























[a]An example for reference for each of these will be needed